## Glossary

anaplastic: when cells divide rapidly and bear little or no resemblance to normal cells in appearance or function.

astrocytoma: a tumor arising in the supportive cells (astrocytes) of the brain or spinal cord; most often in the cerebrum.

benign : does not invade nearby tissues or spread; noncancerous.

biopsy : a sample of tissue cells for examination under a microscope to determine the existence or cause of a disease.

brachytherapy : a type of radiation therapy where capsules containing radioactive substances are surgically implanted into the tumor to deliver radiation; also called internal radiotherapy. cancer : generic term for more than 100 different diseases caused by uncontrolled, abnormal growth of cells. Cancer cells can invade and destroy normal tissue, and can travel through the bloodstream and lymphatic system to reach other parts of the body. chemotherapy : treatment with toxic chemicals (e.g., anticancer drugs).

chondrosarcoma: a rare, malignant bone tumor arising from primitive notochord cells and composed of cartilage.

chordoma : a rare, bone tumor arising from primitive notochord cells; usually occurs at the base of the spine (sacrum) or at the skull base (clivus).

craniopharyngioma : a benign tumor arising from cells located near the pituitary stalk.

differentiation : refers to how developed cancer cells are in a tumor. Well-differentiated tumor cells resemble normal cells and tend to grow and spread at a slower rate than undifferentiated, which lack the structure and function of normal cells and grow uncontrollably.

edema : tissue swelling caused by the accumulation of fluid.

ependymoma : a tumor arising from the ependyma cells lining the ventricles of the brain and central canal of the spinal cord.

epidermoid : a benign, congenital tumor arising from ectodermal cells; also called pearly tumor. glioma : any tumor arising from glial tissue of the brain, which provides energy, nutrients, and other support for nerve cells in the brain.

hydrocephalus : an abnormal build-up of cerebrospinal fluid usually caused by a blockage of

<!-- page_break -->

the ventricular system of the brain; also called 'water on the brain.'

immunotherapy : treatment designed to improve or restore the immune system's ability to fight infection and disease.

intracranial pressure (ICP) : pressure within the skull. Normal ICP is 20 mm HG.

lesion : a general term that refers to any change in tissue, such as tumor, blood, malformation, infection, or scar tissue.

lymphoma: a rare tumor arising from lymph cells; may metastasize to the brain from lymphoma tumor elsewhere in the body.

malignant : having the properties of invasive growth and ability to spread to other areas.

mass effect : damage to the brain due to the bulk of a tumor, the blockage of fluid, and/or excess accumulation of fluid within the skull.

medulloblastoma : a tumor arising from primitive nerve cells; most often in the cerebellum.

meningioma: a tumor arising from the meninges, the membrane that surrounds the brain and spinal cord.

metastasis : the spreading of malignant cells. metastatic : cancerous tumor that has spread from its original source through the blood or lymph systems.

oligodendroglioma : a tumor arising from the support cells (oligodendroglia) that produce myelin, the fatty covering around nerve cells.

pituitary adenoma : a tumor arising from cells in the pituitary gland; tumor may be hormonesecreting (prolactin, adrenocorticotropic, growth hormone) or not.

radiation : high-energy rays or particle streams used to treat disease.

schwannoma (also called neuroma): a tumor arising from Schwann cells that produce myelin. stereotactic : a precise method for locating deep brain structures by the use of 3-dimensional coordinates.

tumor : an abnormal growth of tissue resulting from uncontrolled multiplication of cells and serving no physiological function; can be benign or malignant.

updated &gt; 2.2010 reviewed by &gt; Philip Theodosopoulos, MD